*: add Grafana monitoring best practices (#1772)
pingcap/docs: dev/reference/best-practices/grafana-monitor.md

## Monitoring architecture

Prometheus is a time series database with a multi-dimensional data model and a flexible query language. Grafana is an open source monitoring system for analyzing and visualizing metrics.

![The monitoring architecture in the TiDB cluster](/media/prometheus-in-tidb.png)

For TiDB 2.1.3 or later versions, TiDB monitoring uses the pull method instead of the push method which is used in previous versions. It is a good adjustment with the following benefits:

- There is no need to restart the entire TiDB cluster if Prometheus needs to migrate. Before adjustment, migrating Prometheus requires restarting the entire cluster because the target address needs to be updated.
- You can deploy 2 independent sets of Grafana + Prometheus monitoring platforms (not highly available) to prevent single point of monitoring. To do this, execute the deployment command of TiDB ansible twice with different IP addresses.

> - The Pushgateway which might become a single point of failure can be removed.

Author: Updated. "xxxx is removed." is accurate.

tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Delete"} 520197
tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Explain"} 1
tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Insert"} 7.20799402e+08
tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Select"} 2.64983586e+08
tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Set"} 2.399075e+06
tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Show"} 500531
tidb_executor_statement_total{type="Use"} 466016
```

The data above is stored in Prometheus and displayed on Grafana. Right-click the panel and then click the **Edit** button (or directly press the <kbd>E</kbd> key) shown in the following figure:

![The Edit entry for the Metrics tab](/media/best-practices/metric-board-edit-entry.png)

After clicking the **Edit** button, you can see the query expression with the `tidb_executor_statement_total` metric name on the Metrics tab. The meanings of some items on the panel are as follows:

- `rate[1m]`: The growth rate in one minute. It can only be used for the data of counter type.
- `sum`: The sum of values.
- `by type`: The summed data is grouped by type in the original metric value.
- `Legend format`: The format of the metric name.

> - `Resolution`: The step width defaults to 15 seconds. Resolution means whether to generate one data point for multiple pixels.

Author: Confirmed. "Resolution means whether to generate one data point for multiple pixels." is accurate here.

The baseline defaults to `0`:

![Baseline defaults to 0](/media/best-practices/default-y-min.jpeg)

Change the baseline to `auto`:

![Change the baseline to auto](/media/best-practices/y-min-auto.jpg)

### Tip 4: Use Shared crosshair or Tooltip

In the **Settings** panel, there is a **Graph Tooltip** panel option which defaults to **Default**.

![Graphic presentation tools](/media/best-practices/graph-tooltip.jpeg)

You can use **Shared crosshair** and **Shared Tooltip** respectively to test the effect as shown in the following figures. Then, the scales are displayed in linkage, which is convenient to confirm the correlation of two metrics when diagnosing problems.

Set the graphic presentation tool to **Shared crosshair**:

![Set the graphical presentation tool to Shared crosshair](/media/best-practices/graph-tooltip-shared-crosshair.jpeg)

Set the graphical presentation tool to **Shared Tooltip**:

![Set the graphic presentation tool to Shared Tooltip](/media/best-practices/graph-tooltip-shared-tooltip.jpg)

> ### Tip 5: Enter `IP address:port number` to check the metric information in history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tip 5: Enter `IP address:port number` to check the metrics in history
```

> PD's dashboard only shows the metric information of the current leader. If you want to check the status of a PD leader in history and it no longer exists in the drop-down list of the `instance` field, you can manually enter `IP address:2379` to check the data of the leader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PD's dashboard only shows metrics of the current leader. If you want to check the status of a PD leader in history and it no longer exists in the drop-down list of the `instance` field, you can manually enter `IP address:2379` to check the data of the leader.
```

![Check metric information in history](/media/best-practices/manually-input-check-metric.jpeg)

### Tip 6: Use the `Avg` function

Generally, only `Max` and `Current` functions are available in the legend by default. When the metric information fluctuates greatly, you can add other summary functions such as the `Avg` function to the legend to check the overall trend for the duration of time.

Add summary functions such as the `Avg` function:

![Add summary functions such as Avg](/media/best-practices/add-avg-function.jpeg)

Then check the overall trend:

![Add Avg function to check the overall trend](/media/best-practices/add-avg-function-check-trend.jpg)

### Tip 7: Use the API of Prometheus to obtain the result of query expressions

> Grafana obtains data through the API of Prometheus and you can use the API to obtain information as well. Besides, it also has the following usages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grafana obtains data through the API of Prometheus and you can use this API to obtain information as well. In addition, it also has the following usages:
```

> - Automatically obtains information such as cluster size and status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatically obtains information such as the cluster size and status.
```

- Makes minor changes to the expression to provide information for the report, such as counting the total amount of QPS per day, the peak value of QPS per day, and the response time per day.

> - Performs regular health inspect on the important metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Performs regular health inspection on the important metrics.
```

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

```bash
curl -u user:pass 'http://__grafana_ip__:3000/api/datasources/proxy/1/api/v1/query_range?query=sum(tikv_engine_size_bytes%7Binstancexxxxxxxxx20181%22%7D)%20by%20(instance)&start=1565879269&end=1565882869&step=30' |python -m json.tool
```

```
{
    "data": {
        "result": [
            {
                "metric": {
                    "instance": "xxxxxxxxxx:20181"
                },
                "values": [
                    [
                        1565879269,
                        "1006046235280"
                    ],
                    [
                        1565879299,
                        "1006057877794"
                    ],
                    [
                        1565879329,
                        "1006021550039"
                    ],
                    [
                        1565879359,
                        "1006021550039"
                    ],
                    [
                        1565882869,
                        "1006132630123"
                    ]
                ]
            }
        ],
        "resultType": "matrix"
    },
    "status": "success"
}
```

## Summary

> The Grafana + Prometheus monitoring platform is a very powerful tool. Making good use of it can improve efficiency, saving you a lot of time on analyzing the status of the TiDB cluster. More importantly, it can help you diagnose problems. This tool is very useful in the operation and maintenance of the TiDB cluster, especially when there is a large amount of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Grafana + Prometheus monitoring platform is a very powerful tool. Making good use of it can improve efficiency, saving you a lot of time on analyzing the status of the TiDB cluster. More importantly, it can help you diagnose problems. This tool is very useful in the operation and maintenance of TiDB clusters, especially when there is a large amount of data.
```
